imagine a 10 story high
wall of water with a foamy white peak
smashing into the shore
that's the mental image we all have when
we think of tsunamis
but is it accurate and if it is
why don't daredevil surfers ride them
that's a huge wave begging to be caught
fear of heights top speeds because they
choose life
don't want to smack right into a
building when that thing crashes into
the shore
and flushed through the streets but
they're supposed to be daredevils
and how cool would it be if you with
your cheeks flapping in the wind
could ride that tsunami right into your
10th floor apartment
just don't forget to leave the window
open when you head out
no seriously where would anyone get the
idea to surf a tsunami
i know where movies all those disaster
flicks depicting tsunamis as monstrous
waves
it's like they cut that way from a
summertime fun surfer movie
pasted it into their own and blew the
image way up
and don't forget about that blue gray
filter there we go
our disaster tsunami blockbuster is
ready
leave it to the filmmakers to overlook
the details
realistically the difference between
tsunamis and surfing waves
is as ridiculously huge as that movie
wave about to take out that skyscraper
you can surf on a massive wave as long
as
it's the right kind and that surfable
kind can
even be bigger than tsunamis some
surfers ride them
every year but i'll get into that a bit
later
so what is the difference between this
right kind of wave
and tsunamis well in surfing every wave
has a face or
wall that's the sweet spot each surfer
looks for
to ride down from like going downhill on
a snowboard
only you aren't strapped to the board
and there's always an avalanche behind
you
and there could be sharks right under
your feet waiting to clean up whatever's
left of you when you wipe out
yeah sorry that got a little um
terrifying
surfing's fun but i'll watch from the
beach thanks
tsunamis aren't like this at all imagine
a tsunami more like a giant tide that
comes in
in a matter of minutes yes the water
will likely rise
30 sometimes 60 feet higher than it
usually does
but it won't do it as a wave with that
much needed wall
it'll be something like a hill of water
that rolls in
think of it like a giant gloopy lava
traveling over the shore
only faster no even faster
[Music]
wait that's even more terrifying than
the shark thing
never mind for a normal surfable wave to
appear
all you need is the wind to blow
tsunamis however
are borne by some relatively rare events
like earthquakes
and underwater volcano eruptions this is
also where the difference in force is
coming from
tsunamis aren't always bigger than
regular waves but they
are much more powerful so every time
they come
they tend to bring disaster with them
when an underwater earthquake happens it
produces
unbelievable amounts of energy that
literally punches the water
this energy has to go somewhere and that
somewhere is towards the shore in the
form of a tsunami
in fact next time you're doing the
dishes and in need of some fun
you can make your own mini tsunami just
place your hand fully underwater
and move it up and down even just a
little bit
you'll see ripples on the surface this
is what happens in the ocean
after an earthquake but on a much larger
scale
tsunamis gain incredible speed from the
ocean bed moving or shifting
up to 200 miles per hour so
those things hit land going as fast as
an arrow through the air
well that's why i said cheeks flapping
in the wind
as you ride that gnarly wave but no
seriously they aren't going nearly that
speed when they crash onto the shore
they lose a lot of that energy as they
meet the rise of the ocean floor
near the coastline and any underwater
obstacle in their path
when you surf into your apartment window
you'll only be going about 30 miles per
hour
they might slow down but the wave grows
bigger as it gets closer to the coast
mega tsunamis are those 100 footers
that'll get you into your 10th floor
flat
the average height for most is only
about 10 to 30 feet
yeah only compare that to a normal
surfing wave
it's usually six feet high and only goes
about 13 miles per hour
that's why tsunamis are still fast and
big enough to cause
major damage
but the surfing ones are no walk in the
park either
those kinds can be dangerous too
just like tsunamis wind-driven waves
will rise when they hit an underwater
obstacle near the shore this obstacle be
it an
underwater ridge or coral reef is the
main source of danger for surfers
if a surfer can't hang they'll be
dragged into the deep
where sharp reefs lie that and hitting
the water doesn't exactly feel like a
gentle pad on the back for a job well
done
okay i get it you can't surf a tsunami
but we're in what if territory where the
rules don't apply
and my imagination likes to run wild
so let's have some fun tackling this
challenge
first things first since the tsunami
isn't a usual wave
we need to find a way to turn it into a
surfing spot
you know somehow get it to form a wall
[Music]
one thing that could work is an
artificial obstacle under the water
that'll be specifically designed to
strip the tsunami of its monstrous
energy
sorry we'll lose some of that epic speed
but we need to make it rise higher
the obstacle will have to be a massive
structure but still deep enough
that our surfer doesn't bog his head if
he wipes out
next we need to take further safety
measures in this case
some sturdy gear typical surfing
wetsuits are made of neoprene
a flexible material that can protect you
only from cold water
and help you stay afloat but lucky you
a new technology recently emerged a
wetsuit that can resist a shark bite
it's like kevlar vests in a way all the
tests show that it can't be punctured
with sharp objects
and it prevents bones from breaking
unfortunately bruises from blunt impact
are inevitable
it's tsunami surfing we're talking about
after all
and finally the board itself if riding a
normal surf wave is a fair challenge of
your sense of balance
then keeping yourself on that board
while riding a tsunami
might just be impossible remember what
if
okay let's throw some stabilizers on
that bad boy
there now you're ready you're ready
aren't you
don't chicken out on me now come on
people have done this
they do it all the time in nazir
portugal
[Music]
well they don't serve tsunamis of course
but big wave pro surfers go there every
year to challenge nazaire swell
and this 30-foot tsunami you're about to
ride is just a pup
compared to the biggest wave ever served
it was 80 feet high more than twice the
height of a telephone pole
brazilian pro surfer rodrigo cozia broke
this record in 2017.
maya gabiera set the woman's record
by conquering a 68-foot wave in 2018
and i don't think that's the limit
because waves in nazaire can reach
100 feet at times
hey the reason why waves in nazair are
so big
lies deep underneath the ocean surface
this place has one of the largest
underwater
canyons in europe it's a 140 mile long
three mile deep gash in the seabed that
pushes
insane amounts of seismic energy to
produce
massive waves by the time they hit the
shore the canyon alone
triples wave heights here but there's
also strong ocean currents
and powerful swell winds in this region
so it's like the perfect storm for
surfers who like a real challenge